Add a C++ Interoperability Vision Document (#60501)
apple/swift: docs/CppInteroperability/Roadmap.md

# Swift and C++ Interoperability Roadmap

* Introduction
    * C++, as a language
    * C and Objective-C interoperability
* Specifics and trade-offs
* Goals

> * The approach 

Author: Does it make sense to provide some examples of how we import various APIs? Maybe as an appendix at the end?

Reviewer: It would be very helpful for me, and would help solidify a lot of the vocabulary.

Reviewer 2: I agree as well. I far too often have to help folks experimenting with C++-Interop to get swift-ide-test built just for them to see some examples like these actually.

    * Foreign reference types
    * Owned types and value lifetimes

>     * Iterators and ranges (by Egor)

Author: This and similar wont be in the final document.

    * Generic APIs https://forums.swift.org/t/bridging-c-templates-with-interop/55003
* Evolution and process
    * Example: virtual/overridden APIs
* How interop fits into the ecosystem more generally (lldb, ide, spm)
    * *The* Standard Library overlay (by Egor)

## Introduction

> **This roadmap is** a sketch, rather than a final design for the “forward” (using C++ APIs from Swift) half of C++ and Swift interoperability. This roadmap outlines some high-level topics related to C++ interoperability, overarching goals that drive the project’s design decisions, a process for evolving C++ interoperability over time, and a collection of specific problems and their potential solutions. 

Reviewer 3: Agree, it's much "easier" to read without the emphasis, I also don't see a point in making it **bold**

> “Reverse” interoperability (using Swift APIs from C++) is another extremely important part of the interoperability story, however, reverse interoperability has largely different goals and constraints, which necessarily mean a different design and roadmap. Alex Lorenz will be putting together a roadmap for reverse interoperability which outlines these goals and will shed light onto the differences between the two halves of the projects. In the future this roadmap will need to be updated to explain how these two halves fit together and present the “bi-directional” interoperability story that is C++ and Swift interoperability as a whole. 

Author: > different goals and constraints

Maybe expand on these constrains and goals: going from some specific Swift API to a broad language with less strong idioms. This actually gives a lot for flexibility for the interop model.

Reviewer 4: I disagree that these things are very different.  As soon as you can pass function pointers or closures across the language boundary, you effectively have the problems of bidirectional interop.  Not to be alarmist, but tackling the two directions independently with the assumption that they are fundamentally different seems like a disaster waiting to happen.

Reviewer: This also speaks to the implict/explicit conversion discussion we had today. If I pass (in a swift file) a swift string to a C++ API that expects a std::string, that C++ implementation is going to go off and make assumptions about how it can edit and access the data. So we have to think about how C++ would use Swift data types, not just how Swift would use C++ data types.

> **C++, as a language:** C++ is an stubbornly un-opinionated language. There is little to no consensus on anything from naming, to generic programming, value categories, or error handling (to name a few things). This lack of opinion is in sharp contrast to Swift where there is generally one, specific way to do things. Even in the C++ Standard Library there is a rather un-standard set of API models. The un-opinionated nature of C++ means there are few, if any guarantees about a given C++ API, because the same functionality may be implemented using many different language features or programming paradigms. When consuming an arbitrary C++ API, you must be prepared for *anything*. When consuming Swift APIs, this is not the case. Swift is an opinionated language which means rather than consuming *any* API pattern you are consuming *some*, specific API pattern. Swift clearly defines patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, etc. and it is rare that a codebase deviates from the standard practice. 

Author: Yes, maybe I should make this a bit less harsh on C++. The important piece here is we're going from an unopinionated language to an opinionated one. That necessitates a certain approach for importing APIs and helps shape our goals, so I think it's important to call out.

> **C++, as a language:** C++ is an stubbornly un-opinionated language. There is little to no consensus on anything from naming, to generic programming, value categories, or error handling (to name a few things). This lack of opinion is in sharp contrast to Swift where there is generally one, specific way to do things. Even in the C++ Standard Library there is a rather un-standard set of API models. The un-opinionated nature of C++ means there are few, if any guarantees about a given C++ API, because the same functionality may be implemented using many different language features or programming paradigms. When consuming an arbitrary C++ API, you must be prepared for *anything*. When consuming Swift APIs, this is not the case. Swift is an opinionated language which means rather than consuming *any* API pattern you are consuming *some*, specific API pattern. Swift clearly defines patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, etc. and it is rare that a codebase deviates from the standard practice. 

Reviewer 5: Instead of "opinionated", perhaps  "flexible" (or permissive) might be a better word here.

> **C++, as a language:** C++ is an stubbornly un-opinionated language. There is little to no consensus on anything from naming, to generic programming, value categories, or error handling (to name a few things). This lack of opinion is in sharp contrast to Swift where there is generally one, specific way to do things. Even in the C++ Standard Library there is a rather un-standard set of API models. The un-opinionated nature of C++ means there are few, if any guarantees about a given C++ API, because the same functionality may be implemented using many different language features or programming paradigms. When consuming an arbitrary C++ API, you must be prepared for *anything*. When consuming Swift APIs, this is not the case. Swift is an opinionated language which means rather than consuming *any* API pattern you are consuming *some*, specific API pattern. Swift clearly defines patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, etc. and it is rare that a codebase deviates from the standard practice. 

Reviewer 6: I think perhaps you should restructure this paragraph and the next into a combined section that makes these three points in this order:

1. Swift is an opinionated language where there is a strong culture of following certain idioms.
2. Objective-C is also pretty opinionated and has a culture of following its own idioms. These idioms are different from Swift’s, but the compiler can mechanically map the Objective-C idioms to Swift idioms to present them in a way that feels natural.
3. C++ is *not* opinionated and does *not* have a culture of following certain idioms, so C++ interop will have to be different from ObjC interop. It will probably be more complicated, with more manual knobs and controls, and the results may not be as seamless to clients.

That organization would help to emphasize that you’re worrying about how to handle the mismatch between the styles of the two languages, rather than criticizing the style of C++.

> **C++, as a language:** C++ is an stubbornly un-opinionated language. There is little to no consensus on anything from naming, to generic programming, value categories, or error handling (to name a few things). This lack of opinion is in sharp contrast to Swift where there is generally one, specific way to do things. Even in the C++ Standard Library there is a rather un-standard set of API models. The un-opinionated nature of C++ means there are few, if any guarantees about a given C++ API, because the same functionality may be implemented using many different language features or programming paradigms. When consuming an arbitrary C++ API, you must be prepared for *anything*. When consuming Swift APIs, this is not the case. Swift is an opinionated language which means rather than consuming *any* API pattern you are consuming *some*, specific API pattern. Swift clearly defines patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, etc. and it is rare that a codebase deviates from the standard practice. 

Reviewer 4: While some of what you say here is true, it seems a little incongruous at this point in my reading.  Perhaps its contribution will become clear as I go on, but my first instinct about this paragraph is that it's not serving any purpose, and since it's controversial, may be better omitted.

> **C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability. Starting with the name, C++ is a superset of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. Further, Objective-C was able to be updated to better interoperate with Swift, the generics model is a good example of this. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

Author: And a good base line to compare our designs with.

Reviewer 7: I am not sure I 100% follow the point about ObjC language being able to to be updated. In theory you could continue evolving C++. The issue is that interop needs to work with existing codebases, which was the issue for ObjC as well… This sentence could probably be just dropped.

Author: That's a good point. I'll drop it. 

I think there is something here about Objective-C being able to be evolved so it could interop with Swift, where I doubt the C++ committee would ever evolve C++ to make it interop better with Swift, but I don't think it's a necessary thing to call out here.

Reviewer: I think your point is that ObjC and Swift are converging in some ways to make their interop easier, however that doesn't really help for the purposes of this roadmap, especially since your next sentence blows up any hope that we can use Swift/ObjC interop as a basis. As you said, I think it's best to drop.

> **C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability. Starting with the name, C++ is a superset of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. Further, Objective-C was able to be updated to better interoperate with Swift, the generics model is a good example of this. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

Author: Sure, I can re-word to emphasize that point.

> **C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability. Starting with the name, C++ is a superset of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. Further, Objective-C was able to be updated to better interoperate with Swift, the generics model is a good example of this. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build on the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability. Starting with the name, C++ is a superset of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is relatively simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. Further, Objective-C was able to be updated to better interoperate with Swift: the generics model is a good example. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 
```

Reviewer 4: This paragraph gives me the same sense, of putting off the real content.

## Goals

> Safety is a top priority. The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators).

Reviewer 5: Since this is one of the top goals, I think it might be better to explain what "less safe" means in some more detail. E.g. here is a thought  (not sure if fully captures it)
"A C++ API is less safe in Swift, if a Swift code snippet that can be written using the C++ API is invalid in Swift (e.g. due to memory corruption bugs) but its equivalent C++ code snippet is valid in C++ <link to examples that come later in the document>".

> Safety is a top priority. The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators).

Reviewer 5: Not sure if we should talk about "Correctness". It is an implicit goal i.e., equivalent Swift and C++ code snippets have equivalent I/O behavior. But, in a way we rely on validity of user annotations and reasonable expectations on copy constructors, such as copy-elision optimizations on compilers do.

> Safety is a top priority. The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators).

Reviewer 4: Thinking this through, consider:

```cxx
void f(void(*)(int&, int&));
```

If this is imported into Swift as

```swift
f(thin (inout Int, inout Int)->Void)
```

it has become less-safe, because C++ could create a law-of-exclusivity violation.  I guess that means we'd need to import it as

```swift
f(thin (UnsafeMutablePointer<Int>, UnsafeMutablePointer<Int>)->Void)
```

> Safety is a top priority. The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators).

Reviewer 4: I think it's worth creating a C++ sanitizer that could be used to make crossing the boundary between C++ and Swift safer, by dynamically upholding the guarantees that Swift code statically expects (like exclusivity of `inout` access).

> Safety is a top priority. The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators).

Reviewer 5: > The compiler should not import APIs that would be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators). 

Based on all the discussions, it is already looking like this goal is "best effort", right? The current proposal disallows projections for a very specific definition of projection (using "pointer types"), and it is possible to write valid C++ code that is allowed by the model but more unsafe in Swift than in C++.  So it may be better to rephrase this goal as best effort e.g. may be "the compile should aim to not increase the unsafely when C++ APIs are used from Swift", because completely eliminating it seems like a very hard goal to achieve.

C++ interoperability aims to provide a clear, well-defined mapping for APIs that can be imported, and to draw a clear boundary between these APIs and APIs that cannot be imported. A user should be able to read the C++ interoperability documentation and have a good idea of both how much of their C++ API will be able to be imported in Swift and what that API will look like once it is imported. 

> It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible. Imported APIs, especially containers, should not be implicitly converted to Swift types (in contrast to the automatic Objective-C bridging for NSArray and NSString). 

Author: NSArray and NSString are two examples. If it's not clear enough, I can call out implicit bridging for std::vector and std::string to Array and String.

> It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible. Imported APIs, especially containers, should not be implicitly converted to Swift types (in contrast to the automatic Objective-C bridging for NSArray and NSString). 

Reviewer 5: > in contrast to the automatic Objective-C bridging for NSArray and NSString

I think it may be worth calling out why this automatic bridging causes performance traps. E.g. Does it eagerly copy all the elements?

> It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible. Imported APIs, especially containers, should not be implicitly converted to Swift types (in contrast to the automatic Objective-C bridging for NSArray and NSString). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible.
```

I would leave out conclusions that imply assumptions about implementation approach.  If someone discovered a way to do that implicit conversion without hidden performance traps, surely we'd take it?

Reviewer 8: > ```suggestion
> 
> It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible.
> 
> ```
> 
> 
> 
> I would leave out conclusions that imply assumptions about implementation approach.  If someone discovered a way to do that implicit conversion without hidden performance traps, surely we'd take it?

Reviewer 2: I agree with Dave here. Avoiding performance traps is important, but if we can allow conversions in certain cases or on demand I'm not sure the goals should be against this. For instance would we want to support cases where a std::vector is explicitly assigned to or passed as a Swift Array  type (via a conversion) or does it seem like the right thing to do to have a type error?

> It is a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible. Imported APIs, especially containers, should not be implicitly converted to Swift types (in contrast to the automatic Objective-C bridging for NSArray and NSString). 

Reviewer 2: I wonder if the goal stated should be to provide a Swifty mapping of container types without performance traps rather than explicitly calling out that conversions should be avoided? Could it also be stated that conformances and overlays are able to provide sufficiently similar ergonomics to automatic bridging? I think it could also be important to mention what goals stated for what happens when certain container types are acquired from a C++ API and passed to a Swift API that has parameters that are Swift container types which are the analog to the ones taken from the C++ API.

> It is a goal to preserve the semantics (including performance semantics) that an API was written with by understanding the API’s semantics and mapping it to a Swift idiom that represents the same thing. 

Author: Sure, "understanding the API's semantics" -> "using information provided by the user to understand an API's semantics"? Feel free to suggest something better.

Swift programmers have used C++ APIs since Swift 1.0 through an Objective-C or C bridging layer. It is important that programmers are able to *incrementally* remove these (potentially huge) bridging layers and start using their C++ APIs directly. To make this transition incremental, C++ interoperability must not change the way Swift imports any existing C or Objective-C APIs, even when C++ interoperability is enabled. 

> It is *not* a goal to import every C++ API into Swift. APIs that are imported by Swift should feel Swifty and idiomatic. There must be an easy way to add annotations so that APIs become importable, especially when updating APIs directly is not an option (because the source code is not available). 

Reviewer 4: Without some idea of which kinds of APIs you intend not to import, this statement is perhaps needlessly alarming.  For example, I can live without the ability to use function-style macros from Swift, but I can't think of any other category of C++ APIs that obviously should be off the table, and you can make interop arbitrarily useless to me depending on where you draw that line.

Keep in mind that `vector<bool>` is a specialization, and if you're going to prevent me from using `vector<T>` in code that's generic on `T`, that would be pretty hard to swallow.

Reviewer: I disagree that it's needlessly alarming. If the goal of the first cut of this interop is to import only a manageable subset of C++, saying so in the goals section seems reasonable. It has to be said at some point, otherwise we're back to the previous (very challenging) plan of trying to import everything in a v1 implementation, which is what led us to here in the first place.

## The approach

> The approach for importing C++ APIs into Swift is derived from the fact that both our goals, and C++ as a language, necessitate that not all APIs are imported, and to import an API the user must provide semantic information in some cases. Further, in order to realize our goals (especially the goals of safety and clear, well defined mappings), it is impossible to import any arbitrary C++ API. APIs that are imported by Swift must fall into one of our understood categories or be annotated with semantic information that can be used to classify them into a Swift idiom. 

Reviewer 7: From this sentence it is not clear how much coverage of C++ types/APIs you expect from these categories. Not sure if you want to clarify that or not.

Reviewer 4: > our goals, and C++ as a language, necessitate that not all APIs are imported

I don't know that this claim has been adequately supported by arguments.  I understand that importing all APIs is a hard problem and we shouldn't expect it in the near term, but nothing I've read so far would lead me to the conclusion above.

Author: Sure, I think I can update this. The point I'm trying to make here is that we want to _start_ from a place of not importing all APIs. In this initial version of interop that is outlined by the roadmap, not all APIs will be imported. This is necessitated by the fact that we want specific mappings for API patterns, and the fact that not all C++ APIs fit into one of these patterns. Does that make sense?

Of course, I'm not opposed to eventually supporting all C++ API patterns. If someone wanted to add support for all of these, I don't see any reason we shouldn't. The document outlines exactly how this can be done over time in the evolution section.

In this section, the roadmap will discuss several of the most common C++ API patterns and how they might be imported by the Swift compiler using the goals outlined above.

> ### Definitions

Author: These definitions feel verbose after reading the proceeding section. I think we can probably just delete the whole thing. Is there any useful information here?

Reviewer 9: I personally appreciated it -- as someone with less understanding of these things

Author: Yeah, let's move them to the top of the document and define a few other things. Specifically for owned types, I want to remove the specifics about special members (that will be covered in detail below).

Reviewer 6: The title “definitions” makes it sound like this is a collection of unrelated terminology, but I believe this is really the list of “common C++ API patterns” you were talking about before. If so, you may want to retitle this section.

I also think there’s a sort of hierarchy that you might want to represent more clearly here by reorganizing and referencing back to previous definitions:

* Reference types
* Owned types
    * Trivial types (a specific kind of owned type)
* Projections
    * Iterators (a specific kind of projection)

Reviewer 4: IMO these terms are not universally understood, cannot be assumed, and *must* be defined up-front.

Reviewer: I agree we should keep these. I still have a difficult time keeping them straight without some examples (even after reading this a couple times).

Reviewer 2: I agree, these definitions should be kept in. It really helped my reading of the document.

> **Reference types** have reference semantics and object identity. A reference type is a pointer (or “reference”) to some object which means there is a layer of indirection. When a reference type is copied, the pointer’s value is copied rather than the object’s storage. This means reference types can be used to represent non-copyable types in C++.

Reviewer 4: You've set me up with the introduction that we're about to “discuss several of the most common C++ API patterns,” so when I get here I understand you to be categorizing C++ types.  But the last sentence above leads to the opposite understanding.

Reviewer 4: > reference types can be used to represent non-copyable types in C++

This idea conflicts with the idea that things should not become less safe when imported into Swift.  In C++, non-copyable types are idiomatically used to enforce single-ownership semantics, on which the safety of other constructs may depend.  Representing them directly as copyable references in Swift undermines that.  One solution could be to import a non-copyable C++ `T` as a class `Shared<T>` in Swift, but the API necessary to make the indirection evident will be ugly until Swift itself gets new features… like at least partial direct support for non-copyable types.

> **Owned types** “own” some storage which can be copied and destroyed. An owned type must be copyable and destructible. The copy constructor must copy any storage that is owned by the type and the destructor must destroy that storage. Copies and destroys must balance out and these operations must not have side effects. Examples of owned types include `std::vector` and `std::string`. 

Author: Swift semantics require that copies can be made all over the place, imported types must fit with these semantics until Swift does not require that types are copied all over.

Reviewer 5: Would a type like the following be a owned type: (It owns some storage but not all)
```
struct S { 
   int &unownedReference;
   int ownedIntegerFiled; 
}
```

Reviewer 5: Guess it is a trivial type as per the below definition. So owned type is a super set of trivial types right or are we expecting an explicit copy constructor (directly or transitively)? It may be worth clarifying.

Reviewer 6: I was surprised not to see “value semantics” in this definition, even in a qualified way. Owned types are often value types, right?

Reviewer 4: It's wrong to say that Swift semantics require copying all over the place.  The rampant copying in Swift is almost entirely an implementation artifact, and this fact is easy to demonstrate. Nothing in the Swift documentation gives any assurance of observable differences in address between two objects.  The only copies actually required by the language are those needed to make sure that mutations to one var/inout binding don't affect the values of any others.

Reviewer 4: I'm confused again: the previous paragraph reads like it's talking about categories of Swift types, and this one reads like it's categorizing C++ types.

Reviewer 5: >I was surprised not to see “value semantics” in this definition, even in a qualified way. Owned types are often value types, right?

@beccadax just to clarify, the notion of owned types here is only types that has some storage (because they could potentially internal pointers to it through some method). It doesn't necessary has to have "value semantics" if you are thinking of types that behaves like conceptual values e.g. like String, COW types (assuming their type parameters have value semantics) and the like.  E.g. the following would be "owned", and so is a smart pointer because it allocates and stores a ref count and copies that storage in copy constructors.

More semantically, the property that is required is whether a type has "some storage it copies" and can expose inner pointers to it. (It can totally have any others pointer, point to any storage and may have any side-effects.)  

// This is an owned type as per the above definition.
struct S { 
   StringRef name;
   int &integerRefence
   vector<int> intVector;
   ...  
}

> **An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator. Iterators can be returned by `begin` and `end` methods to form a range.

Author: This should be "begin and end methods" as a concept and the specific APIs (including all of those) can be enumerated in the section below that describes iterator bridging. This should just provide a definition for what we consider an iterator.

> **An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator. Iterators can be returned by `begin` and `end` methods to form a range.

Reviewer 6: Something like this, then?
```suggestion
**An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator, and the collection they belong to must have a pair of methods that return the beginning and end of the iterator's range.
```

> **An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator. Iterators can be returned by `begin` and `end` methods to form a range.

Reviewer 10: We shouldn't explicitly mention `begin()` and `end()` (or any other similar methods) in this paragraph. Those methods are not a requirement for us being able to import an iterator type into Swift, I think mentioning them creates a false impression that they are. Besides, there are types that have a begin method but no end method (e.g. `vfs::directory_iterator`). There are probably other interesting combinations of these methods in the wild which we might support or not support later, and I don't think it's worth getting into such details in the roadmap.

> **An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator. Iterators can be returned by `begin` and `end` methods to form a range.

Reviewer 10: > Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator

I think we should say "equality operator" instead of "comparison operator" and "pre-increment iterator" instead of "increment operator" to make it more precise.

But can we instead say that iterator types should conform to C++ named requirements for iterators without listing the specific requirements?

> **An iterator** represents a point in a range. Iterator types must provide a comparison operator and increment operator. Iterators can be returned by `begin` and `end` methods to form a range.

Reviewer 4: You should be clear that comparison means `==` and not `<`

> **Trivial types** can be copied by copying the bits of a value of the trivial type and do not need any special destruction logic. Trivial types own their storage.

Reviewer 9: Are trivial types a superset of owned types then? (what relation if any are between these)

Reviewer 11: I believe that this is trying to explain that
```c++
typedef char My32BString[32];
```
would create a trivial type `My32BString`.  The storage is owned by the type and there is no need for a ctor or dtor.

However, if you were to wrap this up into a class e.g.
```c++
struct My32BString {
private:
  char data_[32];
public:
  My32BString(const char *s) {
    memcpy(data_, s, strlen(s));
  }

  My32BString(const My32BString &rhs) {
    memcpy(data_, rhs.data_, sizeof(data_));
  }

  My32BString &operator=(const My32BString &rhs) {
    memcpy(data_, rhs.data_, sizeof(data_);
    return *this;
  }
};
```
it now becomes an owned type as the type constructor must be invoked when creating or copying the value even though it is semantically identical to the trivial type.

An owned type mandates the materialization of a VWT when imported where as a trivial type will not.

Reviewer 9: I see, thanks @compnerd that helped a lot :)

Author: Yes, exactly. I think it might actually clarify this to _only_ provide the more detailed definitions below as the added information and type categories should make this distinction clear. WDYT?

Author: > An owned type mandates the materialization of a VWT when imported where as a trivial type will not.

This is a good way to put it.

Author: Specifically, that means it stops having "swift value type" semantics.

> **Projections** are references to storage. Projections of owned types are usually unsafe. Most iterators are projections. 

Reviewer 9: I think for each of these, a code block example would be helpful

"Most iterators are projections" -- I know what this means since I've been contributing a bit but if I wasn't contributing I may not fully understand what this means (I know below you have the `v.begin()` which kinda shows this.

Reviewer 6: I feel like:

> Projections of owned types are usually unsafe.

Might be a little too blunt and summary. Perhaps something more like:

> A projection is only valid as long as the storage it points to is valid. Projections of reference types are usually safe because reference types have storage with long, stable lifetimes, but projections of owned types are more dangerous because the storage associated with a specific copy usually has a much shorter lifetime.

Author: Thanks Becca, I'm going to steal that :)

### Reference types

> Swift types fall into two categories: value types and reference types. The same is true for Objective-C types, which makes importing types easy: structs are imported as value types and Objective-C classes are imported as Swift class types. The same is not true for C++. In typical C++ fashion, there is no clear idiom for defining reference types. All types in C++ are declared in the same way, but some types have reference semantics and others don’t. To be able to express reference types in Swift natively, users must annotate their reference types as such, which will tell the compiler to import them as Swift classes (which have the same semantics). 

Reviewer 4: This is not really a distinction between Swift and C++.  I can create `struct`s with reference semantics and `class`es with value semantics in Swift.

Reviewer 4: Also, Swift classes do not have the same semantics as C++ reference types.  Typically when C++ is used with reference semantics, types are handled through explicit pointers, so `shared_ptr<Foo>` (or `Foo*`) is treated as a reference to `Foo` even if `Foo` itself would otherwise have value semantics.  Idiomatic C++ actually gives you quite a bit more information than idiomatic Swift does in this respect.

Reviewer 3: Pls explain how it's possible to create `struct` with reference semantics in Swift, as from my understanding, Swift's `struct` always "behaves" as if it was just a value type, i.e. it's copied when passed/dereferenced. Under the hood there might be some optimizations, such as copy-on-write in collections, for example, but at the surface level structs always behave like value types.

... unless there are `mutating` functions and/or `inout` parameters, but those apply to functions and not to the structs themselves. Or am I missing something else?

When importing a reference type, there are three main sub-categories that reference type can fall into: 1) **immortal** reference types are “intentionally leaked” and live for the duration of the program 2) **manually managed** reference types are constructed and destroyed manually by the programmer, these are unsafe reference types and should maybe be renamed accordingly 3) **automatically managed** reference types provide retain and release operations which are used to safely destroy a value of the type after its last use. 

> Reference types, their instances, methods on reference types, and other APIs that use reference types generally fit well into the existing Swift model and their use should be allowed without restriction. While it is possible to define unsafe APIs that use reference types, these APIs will not be any less safe than their Swift or C++ counterpart, so there is no reason to dis-allow them. Note: the only case where C++ APIs using reference types must be dis-allowed is when there is not one level of indirection provided (either a reference or pointer). In this case, the C++ API is not using the type as a reference types, and thus breaks the reference type definition (above).

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Reference types, their instances, methods on reference types, and other APIs that use reference types generally fit well into the existing Swift model and their use should be allowed without restriction. While it is possible to define unsafe APIs that use reference types, these APIs will not be any less safe than their Swift or C++ counterpart, so there is no reason to disallow them. Note: the only case where C++ APIs using reference types must be disallowed is when there is not one level of indirection provided (either a reference or pointer). In this case, the C++ API is not using the type as a reference types, and thus breaks the reference type definition (above).
```

Reviewer 11: I'm not sure I understand the case you are thinking of with "there is not one level of indirection provided".  Perhaps an example would be helpful.

Author: Here's an example (I will include something like this with all other examples I'm putting together at the end). Maybe you can help me find a good way to describe this pattern, though?

```
struct SILFunction { ... } // reference type

SILFunction *SILBuilder::makeFunction(...) // Good API: uses SILFunction though one level of indirection
StringRef getName(SILFunction &fn) // Good API: uses SILFunction though one level of indirection

SILFunction findFunc() // Bad API: uses SILFunction as a value types and tries to copy it out
```

The final API here uses a reference type as a value type, making a copy. Does that make the "not one level of indirection" issue clear?

Reviewer 11: Sorry, I'm still not following.  I'm reading the last "bad" example as:

```
void findFunc(SILFunction *);
```

which is an out parameter.  Is it about using reference types by reference?

Author: @compnerd can you confirm that the example I added towards the end of the document clears this up?

> Reference types, their instances, methods on reference types, and other APIs that use reference types generally fit well into the existing Swift model and their use should be allowed without restriction. While it is possible to define unsafe APIs that use reference types, these APIs will not be any less safe than their Swift or C++ counterpart, so there is no reason to dis-allow them. Note: the only case where C++ APIs using reference types must be dis-allowed is when there is not one level of indirection provided (either a reference or pointer). In this case, the C++ API is not using the type as a reference types, and thus breaks the reference type definition (above).

Reviewer: I too found this very challenging to parse and understand.

As per our goal’s specification, this method of importing reference types allows C++ interoperability to have a clear, native mapping for a common C++ API pattern that builds a more general purpose solution off of the pre-established reference type bridging from Objective-C. Additionally, Swift preserves the same safety properties as C++ while providing an even safer option for the common pattern where reference types have a retain and release operation.

### Value types

As mentioned above, swift types fall into two categories: value types and reference types. Value types are relatively simple in Swift, C, and Objective-C, however, the same is not true for C++ where value types may have complex lifetime operations that are used to express non-native concepts (to Swift) such as value types that own memory. This case of owned value types is specifically difficult to map on to Swift as it is novel to the language and does not always work well with the existing model for Swift value types that are trivially copyable.  

> #### Trivial types

Author: It may be helpful to call out that `std::array` is an example of a trivial types (whereas `std::vector` is an example of an owned type).

> This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that do not hold pointers as “trivial types.” These types include primitive types such as integers and types which are composed of other trivial types. Trivial types are “owned” types that provide trivial lifetime operations: a copy is a copy of their bits and a destroy is a no-op. Trivial types have roughly the same mapping throughout Swift, C, Objective-C, and C++ making them trivial to import. Trivial types, their instances, methods on trivial types, and other APIs that use trivial types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

Author: 😁

> This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that do not hold pointers as “trivial types.” These types include primitive types such as integers and types which are composed of other trivial types. Trivial types are “owned” types that provide trivial lifetime operations: a copy is a copy of their bits and a destroy is a no-op. Trivial types have roughly the same mapping throughout Swift, C, Objective-C, and C++ making them trivial to import. Trivial types, their instances, methods on trivial types, and other APIs that use trivial types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

Reviewer 12: "Trivial type" is probably just too misleading a term for this.  "Trivial value type" might be okay, but consider if there's some adequately pithy way to capture that it doesn't have pointers in it.

Also, I think the first sentence is the wrong place to bring up the pointer issue.  You have a good discussion about primitive arithmetic types (although I think "self-contained" is probably a better term than "owned"). Start with that, then segue into how pointers mess that up even if C++ considers them trivial, then break out your precise definition of trivially-copyable types that don't contain pointers.

**Pointer types**

> This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that hold pointers as “pointer types.” These types include pointers themselves and types which are composed of any pointer types (potentially including other types as well). The pointers held by pointer types refer to memory that is *not owned* by the pointer type (making pointer types a “view” or “projection” into memory). While pointer types are very similar to trivial types with respect to their lifetime operations and the fact that they map similarly in these four language, they differ in the fact that while they themselves are not inherently unsafe, they may be used in unsafe APIs (discussed later).

Reviewer 7: "The pointers held by pointer types refer to memory that is *not owned* by the pointer type (making pointer types a “view” or “projection” into memory)." <- Do I understand this correctly that these only exclude pointers to Owned types as defined below? (If so, maybe state this explicitly. If not, need to explain more precisely what you mean.) If owned types require an annotation, how do we differentiate a case of a safe pointer type with a pointer type pointing to owned memory, if the user forgets to annotate the owned type? Or do we assume that the annotations user provides recorrect in our safety model?

Author: Yes, these exclude owned types. I will state that explicitly. 

Here's where copy constructors come into play (and my question "can anyone think of an owned type that holds a pointer and has a trivial (implicit, compiler provided) copy constructor"). Assuming the Swift compiler can correctly differentiate between "owned types" and "pointer types" using special members, I think we are OK here.

Reviewer 5: I guess any type that has a "pointer" and doesn't have a explicit copy constructor is a pointer type.  
> can anyone think of an owned type that holds a pointer and has a trivial (implicit, compiler provided) copy constructor")
Is `S` an Owned type or Pointer type?  If this is a Pointer type (which I suppose), is this code allowed and is it less safe in Swift? 

```
var v = vector(1) 
let start = v.begin() 
doSomething(start) 
fixLifetime(v)
```

```
struct Record {
   int f1, f2 ... ; 
   // huge record consisting of ints/bools/floats and other structs composed of that. 
}; 

struct S { 
   int &unownedReference; 
   Record record; 

   Record& getRecord() { return record; }
}
```

Author: Could I simplify your example to make it:
```
struct S {
  int x;
  int &getRecord() { return x; }
};
```

In this case, `getRecord` is projecting out an inner pointer from a trivial type. I suppose there are two courses of action here:
1. Treat trivial types in the same was as other owned types (with respect to banning projections)
2. Deem this kind of projection sufficiently safe

I tend towards the latter as these kinds of projections are not foreign to Swift (or C for that matter). The counter argument is 1) these kinds of projections are much more common in C++ where references are used for performance and 2) methods make this easier to get wrong. Maybe the solution here is to always borrow self and transform these references into getters (that return values) and setters?

Reviewer 5: Thanks for clarifying. 
1. So IIUC, whatever behavior such methods have on trivial types will have will carry over to pointer types as they are just trivial types with some pointers  
2. **A silenceable compiler warning could be an option for these unsafe cases:**  In C interop, there are cases where if an implicit conversion from `String` to `char *` can result in a short-lived pointer, the Swift compiler presents a warning (this works through the @_ephemeral attributes). I am wondering if in these cases can have a similar compiler warning. But I think in that case there should be a syntactic way to silence the warning, either through a different safer construct (I suspect that doesn't exist here in general, unlike in the String -> char * conversion where a scoped call like `withCString` would be a safer option), or through some other syntactic decoration (adding additional parantheses etc.). This would enable the programmer to express that they are confident of the correctness, because may be `getRecord` is not returning a pointer to the storage but something that would be alive for much longer.

Reviewer 5: In fact, such a silenceable compiler a warning could also be an option in general for allowing unsafe projection on types with storage.

Author: @ravikandhadai your point here is that you think we should introduce a compiler warning for these kinds of unsafe APIs that fall between "projections on owned types" and "safe methods on trivial types"? 

As I've said before, I think a "safe mode" for the clang importer, or some extra safety warnings like this could be a good idea, but we need to detach that "feature" from C++ interop. It should be applied to C and Objective-C interop as well and, while it's related to importing C++ APIs, it's not necessary for our user model (not something that should block interop design).

Reviewer 5: Actually, I am just saying it is an alternative to allow everything and have a slienceable warning where you already ban APIs from automatically importing.

Reviewer 5: So not ban anything but have warnings instead, that can be silenced. If so, it can be more aggressive.

Author: I think the difference here is that projections aren't disallowed because they are too unsafe, they are disallowed because we simply don't know how to import them. The unsafety we are discussing is a side-effect of a naive import of these projects. Warnings indicate that these APIs are just "too unsafe" when in reality we don't have the language (ownership) features to be able to correctly represent them. As Anna suggested, I will elaborate on how that could be done once the required ownership features have landed.

Reviewer 5: > I think the difference here is that projections aren't disallowed because they are too unsafe, they are disallowed because we simply don't know how to import them. 

If we can precisely tell in both sound and complete way when is a method projecting and when it is not, that's a different story. But those are semantic properties and by rice theorem we can only either conservatively over-approximate or be unsound and incomplete. Here are we are choosing to be unsound and incomplete (which is always a practical choice). Then users would always have methods/code snippets that are eliminated only because they aren't conforming to the model, not because they are semantically unsafe. So an alternative would be to turn this "error", which completely disallows based on an model, into a warning. That puts the final decision back into the hands of the user. The warning can detail what is the problem, and if users confirm that is not a problem, they can suppress it and have it imported.  The more the model becomes restrictive the more cases where having it as a warning would make sense.

Reviewer 5: The knobs (read annotations) that is proposed here are at the type level (not at method level, though the problem is at the method level). And those knobs all require the library author to make those changes to permit them. Which is a blanket approval that allows all methods on those types to be used in all context. So a warning on the client side, could be context specific and a fine granularity like a method.

Reviewer 5: At a more practical, the user model can be thought of a providing a compiler "error" in cases that are disallowed. The alternative would be to make it a warning that can be suppressed. 

In cases where the user model is restrictive or that is good amount of uncertainty on its restrictiveness, warnings are a reasonable alternative.

Reviewer 5: Warnings can also let you be little bit more relaxed on where to warn, since there is a way to suppress. So it allows warning on more code snippets (e.g. the user model doesn't have to so carefully tune the safety/restrictiveness). E.g. it is possible to warn on a method that returns a `std::vector<StringRef>` and call it a projection and not worry about disallowing a huge class of methods unusable.

Author: I think this is a great idea that we've often discussed but I neglected to capture in this document: we should have an annotation that can go on both types and individual methods/functions which allows them to be imported regardless of the rules we define here. The inverse already exists with the swift unavailable attribute. 

I don't see why this needs to be tied to a warning/error, though.

Reviewer 5: Method-level granularity by itself is independent of error/warning. 

It does raise an interesting question of whether those suppressions need to be context specific e.g. if it depends on template instantiations and not possible to define it on the method definition. 

> Warnings vs error is a separate question

The factors that would determine this is. 
1. If this suppression has to be client-context specific
2. How much false posistive/negative this user model is going to have. 

The second questions is probably really hard to answer.

> #### Owned types

Author: Is it possible to have an owned type that holds a pointer and doesn't have a copy constructor?

Reviewer 11: Hmm, if I understand correctly, I don't think that is possible.  There would be a copy constructor, even if implicit (and fully inlined).

Author: OK, we need some better terminology here. (I will include this in the "definitions" section.) What I meant to ask is: "Is it possible to have an owned type that holds a pointer and has a trivial (implicit, compiler generated) copy constructor?"

> This category of types refers to types that own memory. These types are pointer types where the type *does own* the memory that their pointers point to. C++ often uses copy constructors and destructors to manage the lifetime of owned types. Therefore, the Swift compiler should assume that pointer types with custom copy constructor and destructors own their memory (and should provide annotations to override this assumption).

Reviewer 11: I am left wondering what custom means here.  Custom as in there is one defined or custom as in an explicit one provided?

Author: Types with non-trivial (user provided) copy constructors as defined by the C++ standard, or types which implicitly have these non-trivial copy constructors because they are composed of a type which has a user provided copy constructor. Does that make sense? I think I will just define "non-trivial copy constructor" to mean this in the definitions and then use that throughout the document. It's unfortunate to overlay the word trivial yet again but...

Reviewer 5: So to clarify, all types with "custom copy constructors" are assumed to be owned types right? User provides annotations if they have to exclude some type from being an owned type. 

This annotation must be used only if the type behaves like a completely unowned type  e.g. types like `StringRef`, `ArrayRef` etc. 

I am wondering if this is a stronger property (i.e. more restrictive) than what is needed. Wouldn't it be sufficient if  the type annotation conveys "I don't have any method that returns a pointer to my storage?".

Reviewer 12: I think you probably do need to talk here about how types having non-trivial value operations doesn't necessarily mean that they're self-contained value types (e.g. `std::vector<char*>`).  Generally, it's good to work out a little bit of the detail here; you want to show you've thought it through and have an idea of where the complexity is going to lie.

#### Lifetime and safety of owned types

> Value types that own memory do not natively exist in Swift today. Because Swift was not built around this kind of value type, Swift handles the lifetime of value types in a subtly different way from C++. This subtle difference makes a naive mapping of C++ value types that own memory to native Swift value types extremely dangerous, especially when dealing with projections of owned storage. Let’s look at an example Swift program that naively imports some owned type and returns a projections of it: 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Value types that own memory do not natively exist in Swift today. Because Swift was not built around this kind of value type, Swift handles the lifetime of value types in a subtly different way from C++. This difference makes a naive mapping of C++ value types that own memory to native Swift value types extremely dangerous, especially when dealing with projections of owned storage. Let’s look at an example Swift program that naively imports some owned type and returns a projections of it: 
```

```
var v = vector(1) 
let start = v.begin() 
doSomething(start) 

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: I am wondering if there are some suggestions on how the compiler can detect projections and how user can override that. In particular, I am curious if the approach to identify projections would be a conservative and sound approximation or a heuristic driven and potentially unsound approximation? 

The former would enforce safety in all cases but could be quite restrictive, the latter would allow unsafe code, but would be less restrictive. 

The following cases are very interesting for this
```
std::vector<int> is not a projection
std::vector<SringRef> is a projection 
Custom type that holds a pointer or reference. This may or may not be a projection. 
```

> fixLifetime(v)

Author: Your point in that example is essentially that a vector is conditionally an owned type based on its template? 

That's a good point, but I wonder how much this actually comes up in practice. I doubt there are many APIs where a std::vector holds some inner pointer to an owned type. None the less, we should think about this more. Maybe there's some way we can make ownedness dependent on whether a template parameter is owned as well.

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: Actually, my question is rather more basic. How do we know what is projection and what is not in the compiler?

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: (Is there an implicit assumption that the "owned types" as defined above automatically means they aren't projections. If it is, I don't think it is very obvious. That actually means **all types with custom copy constructors aren't projections as the default assumption**.  Is that the case?)

> fixLifetime(v)

Author: I can clarify what a projection is. Becca provided some great ideas which I intent to incorporate. As I say in the paragraph below this, "methods which project owned storage" are dis allowed. We assume a method projects owned storage when the parent of the method is an owned type, and the return type of the method is a "pointer type" (as defined above). Does that make sense?

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: Thanks for clarifying. That would certainly help.
> and the return type of the method is a "pointer type" (as defined above).
The problem is there is a huge set of types e.g. collections that can actually just a holder of references. All of these complex types could conceivably have copy constructors. These can be standard library collections, custom collections people write (there is literally a unbounded number of those). The references can be either be reflected in the type parameters or they may not. In fact, a type can partly be a holder of references and partly owns storage as well etc. So totally saying that if something has a  custom copy constructor it is not a projections, seems quite an under approximation for me. That means I can see many cases where a method really is projecting but it will be allowed just because the reference it returns is stored in a type that has a custom copy constructor transitively.  E.g. I can think of smart pointers, std:vector, PointerSet like `SmallPtrSet` and so on and so forth. Any reasonably complex data structure would have copy constructors right?

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: I realized there is a very analogous problem as the "returning" projections problem illustrated above, with in/out parameters. Isn't this a similar but slightly more complex pattern that is unsafe for the same reason as returning projections?

```
struct S {
   std::string myString; 
   void getInnerStorageReference(StringRef &ref) { 
      ref = StringRef(myString); 
   }
};

foo(S s) {
  StringRef stringRef; 
  s.getInnerStorageReference(stringRef);   // Here, this call could happen on a temporary copy of s
  use(stringRef) // This could be a use after free.
}
```
I can see this pattern happening much more commonly with collections, as they are passed by reference mostly.

> fixLifetime(v)

Reviewer 5: (In general, if a method stores an internal pointer in a field, and later returns some object derived from it, it could result in more intricate unsafe patterns that are unsafe in Swift but not in C++, due to the implicit copying highlighted above. However, the above pass-by-reference is closest to returning projection, may be easier to work with.)

```

> Here, because Swift inserts a copy before the call to begin, v projects a dangling reference. This is an example of how subtly different lifetime models make using C++ types from Swift hard, if their semantics aren’t understood by the compiler. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Here, because Swift inserts a copy before the call to begin, v projects a dangling reference. This is an example of how subtly different lifetime models make using C++ types from Swift difficult if their semantics aren’t understood by the compiler. 
```

> To make these APIs safe and usable, Swift cannot import unsafe projections of types that own memory, because they don’t fit the Swift model. Instead, the Swift compiler can try to infer what, semantically, the API is trying to do, or the library author can provide this information via annotations. In this case, the Swift compiler can infer that begin returns an iterator, which Swift can represent through the existing, safe Swift iterator interface. In the future, Swift may gain the necessary ownership features to import and use projections of types that own memory in a safe way, but today, this is not possible, and importing these projections would result in a *less safe* API in Swift than in C++ (violating the first goal above). Other than methods which project owned memory, owned types, their instances, methods on owned types, and other APIs that use owned types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
To make these APIs safe and usable, Swift cannot import unsafe projections of types that own memory, because they don’t fit the Swift model. Instead, the Swift compiler can try to infer what, semantically, the API is trying to do, or the library author can provide this information via annotations. In this case, the Swift compiler can infer that `begin` returns an iterator, which Swift can represent through the existing, safe Swift iterator interface. In the future, Swift may gain the necessary ownership features to import and use projections of types that own memory in a safe way, but today, this is not possible, and importing these projections would result in a *less safe* API in Swift than in C++ (violating the first goal above). Other than methods which project owned memory, owned types, their instances, methods on owned types, and other APIs that use owned types are generally considered to be safe and usable.
```

> To make these APIs safe and usable, Swift cannot import unsafe projections of types that own memory, because they don’t fit the Swift model. Instead, the Swift compiler can try to infer what, semantically, the API is trying to do, or the library author can provide this information via annotations. In this case, the Swift compiler can infer that begin returns an iterator, which Swift can represent through the existing, safe Swift iterator interface. In the future, Swift may gain the necessary ownership features to import and use projections of types that own memory in a safe way, but today, this is not possible, and importing these projections would result in a *less safe* API in Swift than in C++ (violating the first goal above). Other than methods which project owned memory, owned types, their instances, methods on owned types, and other APIs that use owned types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

Reviewer 5: > Other than methods which project owned memory, owned types, their instances, methods on owned types, and other APIs that use owned types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

I think instead of "... use owned types are generally considered to be safe and usable". You could say "... use owned types are exposed". However, Programmers are expected/advised to carefully use projection-like APIs with  lifetime   dependencies  carefully. In the future, we could provide tools and analyses to diagonse more unsafe APIs.

> Note: in the example above, “start” is a pointer type. The use of this pointer in the “begin” API is unsafe, but the type of start itself is not unsafe. In other words, safety restrictions need not be applied to pointer types themselves but rather their unsafe uses. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Note: in the example above, `start` is a pointer type. The use of this pointer in the `doSomething` API is unsafe, but the type of start itself is not unsafe. In other words, safety restrictions need not be applied to pointer types themselves but rather their unsafe uses. 
```

> ### Iterators

Reviewer 9: Maybe there can be 2 broader sections. 

## Generally supported:
- Trivial types
- Reference types

## Custom mappings:
- Iterators 

In which case things would move form Custom mapping to "Generally Supported" as swift gets new features + we improve generally supported features to address issues that inhibit some item in Custom mapping from just being mapped

Something falls into Custom Mapping more because if we just generally imported it, it would be less safe in swift than C++ _but_ we still want to support it, so we Custom map it

Not sure if that makes sense

> Because iterators and ranges follow some specific API semantics, the Swift compiler can map them to a safe, ergonomic, native interface which Egor Zhdan will describe here :)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Because iterators and ranges follow some specific API semantics, the Swift compiler can map them to a safe, ergonomic, native interface which is yet to be defined.
```

### Generic APIs

> C++ provides a couple of tools for writing generic APIs: templates, concepts, virtual classes (inheritance), and various combinations and permutations of these. Templates are likely the most common tool for creating generic APIs. Unfortunately, as outlined in [this forum post](https://forums.swift.org/t/bridging-c-templates-with-interop/55003) (Bridging C++ Templates with Interop), C++ templates do not map cleanly to Swift generics, making interoperability between these generic APIs extremely difficult. Despite this, the linked forum post proposes various strategies for importing C++ templates derived from goals similar to the ones outlines in this roadmap. These proposals should probably be factored into this section of the roadmap at some point in the future.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
C++ provides a few of tools for writing generic APIs: templates, concepts, virtual classes (inheritance), and various combinations and permutations of these. Templates are likely the most common tool for creating generic APIs. Unfortunately, as outlined in [this forum post](https://forums.swift.org/t/bridging-c-templates-with-interop/55003) (Bridging C++ Templates with Interop), C++ templates do not map cleanly to Swift generics, making interoperability between these generic APIs extremely difficult. Despite this, the linked forum post proposes various strategies for importing C++ templates derived from goals similar to the ones outlines in this roadmap. These proposals should probably be factored into this section of the roadmap at some point in the future.
```

Reviewer 11: Do we want to explicitly call out issues with type dependent and value dependent templates?  I suspect that the latter is something we will need to prohibit from being instantiated by Swift code, but may be able to work with `extern template` cases of.

Author: Yes. I would like to inline much of that forum post into this roadmap, but it will require some re-writing and I wanted to get the roadmap out ASAP. Anyway, yes, we should add that here.

## Evolution process

Several specific API patterns are outlined above. These specific API patterns will each need a detailed, self-contained, evolution proposal which can take context from and be framed by this roadmap. Once each of these specific API patterns is accepted by the Swift community (through the evolution process) the design will be ratified and that part of Swift and C++ interoperability will no longer be considered experimental.

> As discussed many time before, the C++ language is huge and scattered (refrase). This roadmap allows specific, focused, and self contained evolution proposals to be created for individual pieces of the language and specific programming patterns by providing goals that lend themself to this kind of incremental design and evolution (by not importing everything and requiring specific mappings for specific API patterns) and by framing interop in a larger context that these individual evolution proposals can fit into.

Reviewer 11: I assume the "refrase" [rephrase] is a TODO?

Author: Yes

> For example, “virtual type interfaces that API consumers provide implementations for” are a fairly common API pattern in C++. Currently, there is no design for such a pattern, but some Swift contributor may extend interop to provide a clear, native mapping for this API pattern through a self-contained proposal following the goals outlined by this document, and framed by “the approach” described above. 

Author: An oddly specific example, maybe this should instead discuss casting or representing class hierarchies.

Reviewer 11: I agree that this is an oddly specific example and deserves some discussion.  Am I correct in interpreting this as ABCs?

Author: Yeah, exactly. I'm just giving this as an example of how we might evolve to support some specific API pattern. Maybe immortal, immutable owned types would be a better example (where we could allow projections).

## The Swift ecosystem

### Tooling and build process

> It goes without saying (yet will be said anyway) that as a supported language feature, C++ and Swift interoperability must work well on every platform supported by Swift. In a similar vein, tools in the Swift ecosystem should be updated to support interoperability features. For example, SourceKit should provide autocompletion, jump-to-definition, etc. for C++ functions, methods, and types and lldb should be able to print C++ types (even in Swift frames). Finally, the Swift package manager should be updated with the necessary features to support building C++ dependencies, a topic which Saleem Abdulrasool may be able to expand on here :)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
It goes without saying (yet will be said anyway) that as a supported language feature, C++ and Swift interoperability must work well on every platform supported by Swift. In a similar vein, tools in the Swift ecosystem should be updated to support interoperability features. For example, SourceKit should provide autocompletion, jump-to-definition, etc. for C++ functions, methods, and types and lldb should be able to print C++ types (even in Swift frames). Finally, the Swift package manager should be updated with the necessary features to support building C++ dependencies (e.g. include search path handling, language modes, or language features).
```

This roadmap outlines a strategy for importing APIs that relies on semantic information from the user. In order to make this painless for users across a variety of projects, Swift will need to provide both inline annotation support for C++ APIs and side-file support for APIs that cannot be updated. For Objective-C, this side-file is an APINotes file. As part of Swift and C++ interoperability, APINotes will either need to be updated to support C++ APIs, or another kind side-file will need to be created. 

### The standard library

Egor Zhdan will discuss importing the standard library, the Swift C++ standard library overlay, etc. :)
* * *

> ## Thoughts not incorporated into the above document:

Author: This is not part of this document, just some things that I was thinking about but didn't know exactly where to put.

Reviewer 11: Maybe move some of the suggested removals here, i.e. TODOs

> * Maybe discuss drawing lines for other things. The patterns you cover talk about memory ownership specifically. What about virtual inheritance? What about templates? What about mutexes and file opens?

Reviewer 11: What makes `mutex` and files special?  C has those as well.

Author: I can just remove this. I was getting at another API pattern: types that use RAII to define a scope of use. But that should maybe be left for another document.

* Safety: It is convention in C and Objective-C to traffic in pointers. In Swift this is written as “unsafe” meaning the unsafety is clearly disclosed. C++ often prefers value types and “fancy pointers” which do not disclosure their unsafety in their name.

> * Safety: because C++‘s un-oppionated APIs are funneled into Swift, they are generally forced through unsafe pointer which loses information. This loss of semantic information leads to mis-use, if more information was captured it would be more difficult, or even impossible, to make such mistakes. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Safety: because C++‘s un-opinionated APIs are funneled into Swift, they are generally forced through unsafe pointer which loses information. This loss of semantic information leads to misuse, if more information was captured it would be more difficult, or even impossible, to make such mistakes. 
```

> * Safety: the subtly different paradims for automatic lifetime management in Swift and C++ mean there is added unsafety to a language like c where lifetime is manually managed, or a language like objc where the lifetime matches swift’s paradims. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Safety: the subtly different paradigms for automatic lifetime management in Swift and C++ mean there is added unsafety to a language like C where lifetime is manually managed, or a language like ObjC where the lifetime matches Swift’s paradigms. 
```

> * Memory safety: lifetimes, reference counting, type safety: importing types as “Any” or “OpaquePointer” is not type safe. Also: use after free, bound checking, null pointer, etc. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Memory safety: lifetimes, reference counting, type safety: importing types as `Any` or `OpaquePointer` is not type safe. Also: use after free, bound checking, null pointer, etc. 
```

struct StatefulObject {
  StatefulObject(const StatefulObject&) = delete;
  StatefulObject() = delete;

  StatefulObject *create() { return new StatefulObject(); }
};
```

This type is not intended to be used directly as the type of a local variable or a `std::vector` element. Values of the type are allocated on the heap by the `create` method and passed around as a pointer. This is weakly enforced by the way the type hides its constructors, but mostly it's communicated in the documentation and by the overall shape of the API. There is no C++ language feature or programming pattern that directly expresses these semantics. 

If `StatefulObject` were written idiomatically in Swift, it would be defined as a `class` to make it a reference type. This is an example of how Swift defines clear patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, and so on, which codebases are encouraged to use as standard practices. These well-defined programming patterns make using Swift APIs a cohesive experience, and C++ interoperability should stive to maintain this experience for Swift programmers using C++ APIs.

> To achieve that, the compiler should map C++ APIs to one of these specific Swift programming patterns. In cases where the most appropriate Swift pattern can be inferred by the Swift compiler, it should map the API automatically. Otherwise, Swift should ask programmers to annotate their C++ APIs to guide how they are imported. For example, Swift imports C++ types as structs with value semantics by default. Because `StatefulObject` cannot be copied, Swift cannot import it via the default approach. To be able to use `StatefulObject`, the user should annotate it as a reference type so that the compiler can import it as a Swift `class`. Information on how to import APIs, such as `StatefulObject`, cannot always be statically determined (for example, `StatefulObject` might have been a move-only type, a singleton, or RAII-style API). The Swift compiler should not import APIs like `StatefulObject` for which it does not have sufficent semantic information. It is not a goal to import every C++ API into Swift, especially without additional, required information to present the API in an idiomatic way that promotes a cohesive Swift expirence. Whether an API is not be imported by default or the default assumptions are incorrect, Swift must provide ways for the user to communicate the correct semantics of an API, overriding the default behavior.

Author: > Whether an API is not be imported by default or the default assumptions are incorrect, Swift must provide ways for the user to communicate the correct semantics of an API, overriding the default behavior.

We've already established that annotations will be necessary. I will remove this last sentence.

### Value types

Swift types fall into two categories: value types and reference types. Value types are relatively simple in Swift, C, and Objective-C, however, the same is not true for C++ where value types may have complex lifetime operations that are used to express non-native concepts (to Swift) such as value types that own memory. This case of owned value types is specifically difficult to map on to Swift as it is novel to the language and does not always work well with the existing model for Swift value types that are trivially copyable.  

#### Trivial types

This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that do not hold pointers as “trivial types.” These types include primitive types such as integers and types which are composed of other trivial types. Trivial types are “owned” types that provide trivial lifetime operations: a copy is a copy of their bits and a destroy is a no-op. Trivial types have roughly the same mapping throughout Swift, C, Objective-C, and C++ making them trivial to import. Trivial types, their instances, methods on trivial types, and other APIs that use trivial types are generally considered to be safe and usable.

**Pointer types**

> This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that hold pointers as “pointer types.” These types include pointers themselves and types which are composed of any pointer types (potentially including other types as well). The pointers held by pointer types refer to memory that is *not owned* by the pointer type (making pointer types a “view” or “projection” into memory). While pointer types are very similar to trivial types with respect to their lifetime operations and the fact that they map similarly in these four language, they differ in the fact that while they themselves are not inherently unsafe, they may be used in unsafe APIs (discussed later).

Reviewer 12: Yeah, again, I think you need a term that doesn't immediately lead to confusion.  "Pointer type" obviously means something very specific in C/C++, and you don't want to redefine it.

**C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability, not only to preserve existing Swift codebases and provide a incremental story, but also to reduce unnecessary cognitive burden on developers. Starting with the name, C++ inherits much of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

## Goals

> Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. C++ often puts safety in the hands of the programmer. Nullability, memory safety, lifetimes, and mutability are all the programmers responsibility in C++. Swift has the opposite default behavior in many of these cases. Simply using C++ APIs should not completely destroy the memory safety, nullability check, etc. that Swift tries to offer. At a minimum, imported C++ APIs should generally not be less safe to use from Swift than they would be in C++, and C++ interoperability should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators). When it is possible for the Swift compiler to statically derive safety properties and API semantics (i.e., how to safely use an API in Swift) from the C++ API interface, C++ interoperability should take advantage of this information. When that is not possible, C++ interoperability should provide annotations to communicate the nessisary information to use these APIs safely in Swift. When APIs cannot be used safely or need careful management, Swift should make that clear to the programmer, and even make those APIs unavailable if there's no reasonable path to a sufficently safe interface.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language, which creates a tension with C++. While Swift enforces strong rules around things like memory safety, mutability, and nullability, C++ largely makes the programmer responsible for handling them correctly, on pain of undefined behavior. It is a goal of C++ interoperability that simply using C++ APIs should not completely undermine Swift's language guarantees. At a minimum, imported C++ APIs should generally not be less safe to use from Swift than they would be in C++, and C++ interoperability should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators). When it is possible for the Swift compiler to statically derive safety properties and API semantics (i.e., how to safely use an API in Swift) from the C++ API interface, C++ interoperability should take advantage of this information. When that is not possible, C++ interoperability should provide annotations to communicate the necessary information to use these APIs safely in Swift. When APIs cannot be used safely or need careful management, Swift should make that clear to the programmer. As a last resort, Swift should make APIs unavailable if there's no reasonable path to a sufficiently safe Swift interface for them.
```

> C++ interoperability should strive to have good diagnostics. When an API cannot be imported, this needs to be communicated to the programmer. The compiler should produce a clear error any time an API that could not be imported is used, and should strive to guide the programmer towards an API interface that can be imported (for example, by suggesting annotations). The compiler should warn users about incorrect API usage, and potentially slow or unsafe patterns. C++ often has complex type names, especially for template specializations, this is an area where the Swift compiler can do better than C++ by showing shorter and more helpful diagnostics, right at the call-site. When the Swift compiler can present better diagnostics than Clang, it absolutely should. 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
C++ interoperability should strive to have good diagnostics. When an API cannot be imported, this needs to be communicated to the programmer. The compiler should produce a clear error any time an API that could not be imported is used, and it should suggest ways that the interface could be changed that would make it importable (for example, by adding annotations). The compiler should also warn users about incorrect API usage, including potentially slow or unsafe patterns.
```

Consider starting with something about it being a goal to provide diagnostics about using C++ APIs that are at least as good as a C++ compiler would provide.  I don't know that you need to elaborate on that with the stuff about ways you could provide better diagnostics — it's interesting, and it'd be good to do, but it's not a core goal, and it's not really in scope for this document.

> C++ provides tools to create high-performance APIs. C++ interoperability should embrace this. Interop should not be a significant source of overhead and performance concerns should not be a reason to continue using C++ to call C++ APIs rather than Swift.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
C++ provides tools to create high-performance APIs. C++ interoperability in Swift should embrace this. Interop should not be a significant source of overhead, and performance concerns should not be a reason to continue using C++ to call C++ APIs rather than Swift.
```

> C++ is an un-opinionated, multi-paradigm language, designed to fit many use-cases. Different codebases often express the same concept in different ways. There is no prevailing consensus among C++ programmers about the right way to express specific concepts: how to name types and methods, how much to use templates, when to use heap allocation, how to propagate and handle errors, and so on. This creates problems for importing C++ APIs into Swift, which tends to have stronger conventions, some of which are backed by language rules. For instance, it is a common pattern in some C++ codebases to have classes that are only (or at least mostly) intended to be heap-allocated and passed around by pointer; consider this example:

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
C++ is an un-opinionated, multi-paradigm language, designed to fit many use cases. Different codebases often express the same concept in different ways. There is no prevailing consensus among C++ programmers about the right way to express specific concepts: how to name types and methods, how much to use templates, when to use heap allocation, how to propagate and handle errors, and so on. This creates problems for importing C++ APIs into Swift, which tends to have stronger conventions, some of which are backed by language rules. For instance, it is a common pattern in some C++ codebases to have classes that are only (or at least mostly) intended to be heap-allocated and passed around by pointer; consider this example:
```

```
// StatefulObject has object identity and reference semantcs: 
// it should be constructed with "create" and used via a pointer.
struct StatefulObject {
  StatefulObject(const StatefulObject&) = delete;
  StatefulObject() = delete;

  StatefulObject *create() { return new StatefulObject(); }
};
```

> This type is not intended to be used directly as the type of a local variable or a `std::vector` element; it is allocated on the heap by the `create` method and passed around as a pointer. This is weakly enforced by the way it hides its constructors, but mostly it's communicated in the documentation and by the overall shape of the API; there is no language feature or programming pattern that expresses the specific semantics of this type. 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
This type is not intended to be used directly as the type of a local variable or a `std::vector` element. Values of the type are allocated on the heap by the `create` method and passed around as a pointer. This is weakly enforced by the way the type hides its constructors, but mostly it's communicated in the documentation and by the overall shape of the API. There is no C++ language feature or programming pattern that directly expresses these semantics.
```

> In Swift, `StatefulObject` would be explicitly defined as a reference type using a specific language construct (defining it as a `class`). Swift defines clear patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, and so on, and codebases are encouraged to use these standard practices. These well-defined programming patterns make using Swift APIs a cohesive experience; an experience that C++ interoperability should stive to maintain for Swift programmers using C++ APIs.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
If `StatefulObject` were written in Swift, it would be idiomatically be defined as a `class` to make it a reference type. This is an example of how Swift defines clear patterns for naming, generic programming, value categories, error handling, and so on, which codebases are encouraged to use as standard practices. These well-defined programming patterns make using Swift APIs a cohesive experience, and C++ interoperability should strive to maintain that for Swift programmers using C++ APIs.
```

> To maintain this cohesive experience, the compiler should map C++ APIs to one of these specific Swift programming patterns. To be able to map *any* C++ APIs to *some* specific Swift pattern, the Swift compiler must have some semantic information about the API. This semantic information may be provided through annotations or heuristics in the compiler. In the above example, the user should annotate `StatefulObject` as a reference type so that the Swift compiler can import it as a Swift `class`. 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
To achieve that, the compiler should support mapping C++ APIs to one of these specific Swift programming patterns. In cases where the most appropriate Swift pattern can be heuristically inferred by the compiler, it should do so automatically. Otherwise, Swift should allow programmers to annotate C++ APIs to guide how they are imported into Swift. In the above example, the user should annotate `StatefulObject` as a reference type so that the Swift compiler can import it as a Swift `class`. 
```

Author: > the compiler should **support mapping** C++ APIs to one of these specific Swift programming patterns.

"Support mapping" makes it seem optional. While in this case it is, I think we should always have some specific mapping. I think it's better to say "the compiler should map C++ APIs..." because we're talking about something more general: "one of these specific Swift programming patterns" (not just classes).

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

> The Swift compiler should not import APIs for which it does not have sufficent semantic information. It is not a goal to import every C++ API into Swift, especially without additional, required information to present the API in an idiomatic way that promotes a cohesive Swift expirence. The Swift compiler will have a default path for importing APIs where C++ interoperability makes various assumptions about the API that is being imported. Sometimes, as is the case above with `StatefulObject`, an API will fall outside of this path, and will not be imported by default. Other times, the default assumptions will be incorrect for a given API. In both cases, Swift must provide ways for the user to communicate the correct semantics of an API, overriding the default behavior.

Reviewer 12: I feel like this can be integrated into the previous paragraph to make a cohesive narrative.  Maybe you can start by talking about the default rules for importing struct types as value types and how `StatefulObject` doesn't fall into them because of the deleted constructors.  You can then briefly explain why we don't want to heuristically *infer* that `StatefulObject` is a reference type; and then you finish up by saying that the user can annotate it explicitly.

Because of the difference in idioms between the two languages, and because of the safety concerns when exposing certain APIs to Swift, a C++ API might look quite different in Swift than it does in C++. It is a goal of C++ interoperability to provide a clear, well-defined mapping for whether and how APIs are imported into Swift. Users should be able to read the C++ interoperability documentation to have a good idea of how much of their API will be able to imported and what it will look like. Swift should also provide tools for inspecting what a C++ API will look like in Swift, and these tools should call out notable parts of the API that were not imported.

Finally, Swift programmers have used C++ APIs since Swift 1.0 through an Objective-C or C bridging layer. It is important that programmers are able to *incrementally* remove these (potentially huge) bridging layers and start using their C++ APIs directly. To make this transition incremental, C++ interoperability must not change the way Swift imports any existing C or Objective-C APIs, even when C++ interoperability is enabled. 

## The approach

> The approach for importing C++ APIs into Swift is derived from the fact that both our goals, necessitate that not all APIs are imported automatically; to import an API the user must provide semantic information in some cases. Further, in order to realize our goals (especially the goals of safety and clear, well defined mappings), it is impossible to import any arbitrary C++ API. APIs that are imported by Swift must fall into one of our understood categories or be annotated with semantic information that can be used to classify them into a Swift idiom. 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
The detailed approach follows from the goals above. If a C++ API has semantic annotations telling Swift that it follows a certain pattern, Swift will try to create a Swift interface for it following the rules of that pattern. In the absence of those annotations, Swift will try to heuristically recognize an appropriate pattern. If this fails, Swift will make the API unavailable.
```

# Swift and C++ Interoperability Roadmap

## Introduction

**This roadmap is** a sketch, rather than a final design for the “forward” (using C++ APIs from Swift) half of C++ and Swift interoperability. This roadmap outlines some high-level topics related to C++ interoperability, overarching goals that drive the project’s design decisions, a process for evolving C++ interoperability over time, and a collection of specific problems and their potential solutions. 

“Reverse” interoperability (using Swift APIs from C++) is another extremely important part of the interoperability story, however, reverse interoperability has largely different goals and constraints, which necessarily mean a different design and roadmap. Alex Lorenz will be putting together a roadmap for reverse interoperability which outlines these goals and will shed light onto the differences between the two halves of the projects. In the future this roadmap will need to be updated to explain how these two halves fit together and present the “bi-directional” interoperability story that is C++ and Swift interoperability as a whole. 

> **C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability, not only to preserve existing Swift codebases and provide a incremental story, but also to reduce unnecessary cognitive burden on developers. Starting with the name, C++ inherits much of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe, add a line break after `**C and Objective-C interoperability:**`, so that  it acts more like an anchor / section header...

Reviewer 2: @compnerd In the past you've mentioned the difference in the linkage model between C and C++ interop. Should this be mentioned out here?

> ## Goals

Reviewer 3: In my opinion, would be great to list goals clearly as a section header and then expand more. That way it's possible to quickly glance all of the goals at once and focus on the ones the reader most interested in.

E.g.:

**- Safety**

Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Therefore, the Swift compiler should not import APIs that will likely be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by....

**- Diagnostics Support**
The Swift language was built with good diagnostics in mind....

**- Performance**
In a similar vein, the Swift programming language strives ...

Just a stylistic comment, I agree with the spirit.

> Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Therefore, the Swift compiler should not import APIs that will likely be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators). This means that, while some common C++ APIs will be exposed through a safer interface in Swift, most C++ APIs will be imported with the same level of unsafety as they have in C++. 

Author: @rjmccall I updated the document based on this suggestion. I discuss safety more below in the "Lifetime and safety of owned types" section. Specifically C++'s lexical safety model, which mostly applies to owned types. Do you think I should try to pull some of that up here? Or is what I have sufficient?

To be able to follow the “Swift API model,” that is to have expressive APIs with strong idioms, the following goals are nessisary:

* C++ interoperability aims to provide a clear, well-defined mapping for APIs that can be imported, and to draw a clear boundary between these APIs and APIs that cannot be imported. A user should be able to read the C++ interoperability documentation and have a good idea of both how much of their C++ API will be able to be imported in Swift and what that API will look like once it is imported. 

> * It is a goal to preserve the semantics (including performance semantics) that an API was written with by using information provided by the user to understand an API's semantics and mapping those semantics to a Swift idiom that represents the same thing.

Reviewer 12: I don't know what this paragraph really means.

> * It is *not* a goal to import every C++ API into Swift. APIs that are imported by Swift should feel Swifty and idiomatic. There must be an easy way to add annotations so that APIs become importable, especially when updating APIs directly is not an option (because the source code is not available). 

Reviewer 12: Maybe you can move this up to right after the discussion of `StatefulObject` and talk about the role of annotations more generally.  So you want to talk about how there are default rules and assumptions, and how things that don't match those will need to need to be imported differently or made unavailable by default, and then you can talk about how that can be customized with annotations.  That will lead very nicely into the paragraph about understanding how the API will look in Swift, and that in turn leads nicely into this final paragraph about existing uses through bridging.

In this section, the roadmap will discuss several of the most common C++ API patterns and how they might be imported by the Swift compiler using the goals outlined above.

### Reference types

Swift types fall into two categories: value types and reference types. The same is true for Objective-C types, which makes importing types easy: structs are imported as value types and Objective-C classes are imported as Swift class types. The same is not true for C++. In typical C++ fashion, there is no clear idiom for defining reference types. All types in C++ are declared in the same way, but some types have reference semantics and others don’t. To be able to express reference types in Swift natively, users must annotate their reference types as such, which will tell the compiler to import them as Swift classes (which have the same semantics). 

> When importing a reference type, there are three main sub-categories that reference type can fall into: 1) **immortal** reference types are “intentionally leaked” and live for the duration of the program 2) **manually managed** reference types are constructed and destroyed manually by the programmer, these are unsafe reference types and should maybe be renamed accordingly 3) **automatically managed** reference types provide retain and release operations which are used to safely destroy a value of the type after its last use. [(Examples below.)](## Examples and Definitions)

Reviewer 2: This might be a distraction, but are there any special categories that could make sense for C++ smart pointers like unique/shared ptr? I've seen other interop systems explicitly map these (eg https://cxx.rs/binding/uniqueptr.html).

* How interop fits into the ecosystem more generally (lldb, ide, spm)
    * *The* Standard Library overlay (by Egor)

## Introduction

**This roadmap is** a sketch, rather than a final design for the “forward” (using C++ APIs from Swift) half of C++ and Swift interoperability. This roadmap outlines some high-level topics related to C++ interoperability, overarching goals that drive the project’s design decisions, a process for evolving C++ interoperability over time, and a collection of specific problems and their potential solutions. 

“Reverse” interoperability (using Swift APIs from C++) is another extremely important part of the interoperability story, however, reverse interoperability has largely different goals and constraints, which necessarily mean a different design and roadmap. Alex Lorenz will be putting together a roadmap for reverse interoperability which outlines these goals and will shed light onto the differences between the two halves of the projects. In the future this roadmap will need to be updated to explain how these two halves fit together and present the “bi-directional” interoperability story that is C++ and Swift interoperability as a whole. 

> **C and Objective-C interoperability:** C++ interoperability will have to build off of the previous art of C and Objective-C interoperability, not only to preserve existing Swift codebases and provide a incremental story, but also to reduce unnecessary cognitivie burdon on developers. Starting with the name, C++ inherits much of C, which means C++ interoperability has a great starting place to build off of. C is a simple language without many high level constructs, so importing C APIs is, relatively, simple. On the other hand, Objective-C adds some high level constructs, such as reference types and a generics model. However, unlike C++, Objective-C has strong idioms; there are only so many patterns for doing some specific thing. So, while C and Objective-C interoperability is a good starting place, the model for importing these languages cannot be taken wholesale for C++ interoperability. 

Reviewer 13: Typo: "cognitive burden"

## Goals

Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Therefore, the Swift compiler should not import APIs that will likely be less safe in Swift than they are in C++ and interop should strive to make imported APIs *safer* in Swift than they are in C++ by providing safe API interfaces for common, unsafe C++ API patterns (such as iterators). This means that, while some common C++ APIs will be exposed through a safer interface in Swift, most C++ APIs will be imported with the same level of unsafety as they have in C++. 

> In a similar vein, the Swift programming language strives to be fast. C++ interoperability should follow suite, making it a goal not to have hidden performance traps. C++ APIs should have similar performance in Swift as C++ and should be called directly when possible.

Reviewer 13: nit: "follow suite" -> "follow suit"

Finally, Swift programmers have used C++ APIs since Swift 1.0 through an Objective-C or C bridging layer. It is important that programmers are able to *incrementally* remove these (potentially huge) bridging layers and start using their C++ APIs directly. To make this transition incremental, C++ interoperability must not change the way Swift imports any existing C or Objective-C APIs, even when C++ interoperability is enabled. 

## The approach

The approach for importing C++ APIs into Swift is derived from the fact that both our goals, necessitate that not all APIs are imported automatically; to import an API the user must provide semantic information in some cases. Further, in order to realize our goals (especially the goals of safety and clear, well defined mappings), it is impossible to import any arbitrary C++ API. APIs that are imported by Swift must fall into one of our understood categories or be annotated with semantic information that can be used to classify them into a Swift idiom. 

In this section, the roadmap will discuss several of the most common C++ API patterns and how they might be imported by the Swift compiler using the goals outlined above.

> ### Reference types

Author: It may be good to also discuss the possibility of having a "Swift reference type" or a foreign reference type that has Swift reference counting.

Reviewer 12: I would suggest starting with (trivial and non-trivial) value types, since they're the default patterns we're going to try to recognize.

You can explain the value/reference type distinction once and then assume it later; no need to repeat it in different sections.

**Pointer types**

This roadmap will refer to trivial value types that hold pointers as “pointer types.” These types include pointers themselves and types which are composed of any pointer types (potentially including other types as well). The pointers held by pointer types refer to memory that is *not owned* by the pointer type (making pointer types a “view” or “projection” into memory). While pointer types are very similar to trivial types with respect to their lifetime operations and the fact that they map similarly in these four language, they differ in the fact that while they themselves are not inherently unsafe, they may be used in unsafe APIs (discussed later).

#### Owned types

This category of types refers to types that own memory. These types are pointer types where the type *does own* the memory that their pointers point to. C++ often uses copy constructors and destructors to manage the lifetime of owned types. Therefore, the Swift compiler should assume that pointer types with custom copy constructor and destructors own their memory (and should provide annotations to override this assumption).

> #### Lifetime and safety of owned types

Reviewer 5: @zoecarver one high-level comment: this section talks exclusively about "projection" as defined here (returning pointer types from types with copy constructors). In general, our main assumption/soundness requirement is that "C++ functions/methods that results in lifetimes dependencies between arguments and results" aren't directly used from Swift.

We have a way to detect "projections" as defined here using a syntactic scheme, which is very common. However, in general we wouldn't be catching 100% of cases with dependent lifetimes (there were some examples in the previous comments that illustrates such cases). So, I think it is best if we do not close the possibility of a future analysis that expands the identification to other lifetime dependent functions and makes them unavailable to Swift. 

So, I think it is best to call out that "while we would start by making projections as defined here unavailable in Swift, it is possible that in the future we could identify more lifetime dependent functions and make them unavailable".

The following example highlights the case described above:

```
func getCString(str: std.string) -> UnsafePointer<CChar> { str.c_str() }
```

The above function returns a dangling reference to `str`‘s inner storage. In C++, it is assumed that the programmer understands this is a bug, and generally would be expected to take `str` by reference. This is not the case in Swift. To represent this idiomatically in Swift, the lifetimes must be associated through a projection. Using the tools provided in the ownership manifesto this would mean yielding the value returned by `c_str` out of a [generalized accessor](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/OwnershipManifesto.md#generalized-accessors)(resulting in an error when the pointer is returned). 

>  

Reviewer 5: It think it is worth calling out that we would be providing annotations to import projections and also, perhaps, distinguish the following cases: 
- _The method looks like a projection but is not really one_ e.g. it may be returning a reference/pointer it was created with like `StringRef.getValue()` etc. In this case, it is safe to use it. So the annotation can read like `@has_indepedent_lifetime` to capture this fact and allow such functions. 
- _ The method is really a projection_: in this case we provide an `unsafe_import` attribute that renames the function and also comes with the expectation that the user is responsible for managing its lifetime. This is because, it  may be necessary for programmers to write ergonomic overlays for C++ types. We expect that our users use `@_noImplicitCopy` annotation  and `withExtendingLifetime` and other language affodances to carefully use these APIs in those cases.
